---
title: Atole
date: "2018-03-04"
category: Food
tags: ["corn", "beverage", "chocolate"]
---

Atole is a pre-Hispanic hot beverage made with a ground masa or flour, water or milk, and sugar, which can be found througout Mexico, and it is very common in Oaxaca. Corn is the historical grain and the most common still, but you can also find it made with rice or wheat, along with other grains such as amaranth. The grain thickens the drink so it has lots of mouthfeel, retains its heat better than a thinner drink, like coffee or tea, and feels more filling. It is commonly served as either plain/blanco or with chocolate as atole de chocolate (also known as champurrado). You can also find all kinds of variations with different flavors, including different kinds of fruits, peanuts, and fresh corn (elote) instead of meal (masa).

I often make atole at home in the cool mornings of winterx. You can find it at places that serve breakfast, and it will most often be served with a pan dulce, just like chocolate. If you have a pot and stove you can make your own very easily. There is a range of "meal" that you can use. The most common here in Oaxaca would be cornstarch (fécula de maíz) for a very smooth atole, masa (freshly ground corn) or masa harina (corn flour, not corn meal) for more texture/flavor, or rice flour (harina de arroz). [Mexico in My Kitchen has a nice range of recipes](https://www.mexicoinmykitchen.com/?s=atole) with different flavorings, and mostly uses masa harina. [David Liebowitz has a classic recipe](https://www.davidlebovitz.com/atole-mexican-drink-recipe/) using cornstarch. In Mexico you can also buy packets of the biggest cornstarch brand, Maizena, that contain the cornstarch with flavoring, and simple instructions, where you add the milk and sugar.

##Chocolateatole versus Atole de Chocolate

There is a related drink that is specific to the south of Mexico and is readily found in Oaxaca, chocolateatole (all one word). Chocolateatole is different from atole de chocolate (champurrado), though you will find a lot of references on the internet lumping all of these terms together. Even when you ask native Oaxacaños what the difference is, you'll get all kinds of responses. Most often people say "I don't know, but they're different." For some people chocolateatole is a blend of chocolate de agua/leche with atole, while atole de chocolate (champurrado) is atole made by adding chocolate directly to the recipe.

After poking around a bit I discovered that chocolateatole is truly a different drink with a new ingredient. It is made with chocolate (cacao), rice/wheat, sugar, and white cacao or pataxte here in Oaxaca, which is a relative of the classic chocolate cacao tree (Theobroma cacao). Pataxte (Theobroma bicolor) is also known as Mocambo or Jaguar Tree. You can get all into the nerdy history in this [article at Chocolate Class](https://chocolateclass.wordpress.com/tag/pataxte/). If you want to see the whole process for chocolateatole, this is a [great video in the indigenous Zapotec language](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RjomxSR-6nk). This is not something you will normally make on your own, even in Oaxaca, as you need access to the ground fermented pataxte seeds.

You can see the difference between atole de chocolate and chocolateatole by the foam on top. Pataxte creates some serious foam when whipped up and when it is served you will have a nice, thick foamy topping in your bowl, while the regular atole will not be foamy or if someone did whip it, you'll only see a little bit of froth or bubbles.